The home page for this transcript is https://github.com/peterkaminski/transcript-DWeb-Meetup-If-Big-Tech-is-Toxic-how-do-we-build-something-better-2020-09-22

[0:00:00] spk_0: and Facebook's just a place to see what my friends are doing. What they don't realize is there's entire teams of engineers whose job is to use your psychology against you. E was the co inventor of the Facebook like button was the president Pinterest, Google, Twitter and Scream. They were meaningful changes happening around the world because of these platforms. E think we were naive about the flip side of that coin. We get rewarded by parts, likes thumbs up, and we conflate that with value. And we conflated with truth. Ah, whole generation is more anxious, more depressed. I always felt like, fundamentally, it was a force for good. I don't know if I feel that way. Facebook discovered that they were able to affect riel world behavior and emotions without ever triggering the users awareness.

[0:00:52] spk_2: They are completely clueless.

[0:00:56] spk_0: Fake news spreads six times faster than Trudeau's. We're being bombarded with rumors. If everyone's entitled to their own facts, there's really no need for people to come together. In fact, there's really no need for people to interact way have less control over who we are and what we really believe. If you want to control the population of your country. There has never been a tool is effective. This Facebook. We built these things, and we have a responsibility to change it. Theo Intention could be. How do we make the world better if technology creates mass chaos, loneliness, more polarization, mawr, election hacking, more inability to focus on the real issues. We're toast. This is checkmate on humanity. That place is, and

[0:01:54] spk_2: that was our friends. Tristan Harris is a Raskin and the social dilemma, but I think we're here to say that it is not quite checkmate yet. Welcome to everybody. This is the D. We meet up, and I am very pleased to introduce you to today's moderator, My Ishikawa. Sudden, I met my at the 2016 d Web summit because we did a special session at the end about how to make this community more diverse, more inclusive. And that's where I met my. She has been doing that work ever since She was the global policy analyst for F studying copyright, and most of you know her as the associate producer of the Web camp. It's my pleasure to turn this over to our moderator today. My Ishikawa sudden

[0:02:41] spk_3: thank you so much, Wendy. So why are we here today? We're here today because a lot of us know that the Internet is broken. And this movie, the social dilemma, just painted this picture for maybe 25 million viewers who may just be waking up to some of these problems. These problems of how these big platforms are, what is what the Internet they know and is the Internet that they know and these issues of manipulation of data harvesting, of selling that data to advertisers for us to become the product that they're selling. That is an issue that a lot of people still don't know about. But we're the do Web community, and we're builders. Were activists were designers, and we've been paying attention to all the ways that it's broken for a long time. But we focus on the solutions, and we nerd out about the technological systems, the organizational systems that could make an Internet that's actually participatory, resilient and decentralized. So I'm really thrilled. Thio introduce the stellar set of Panelists today. So first off we have Cory Doctorow. Corey, I knew actually, first not as the bestselling sci fi author, but as my predecessor at the E FF, who also focused on international copyright issues. And in addition to being a prolific writer, he's been back with the F F as a special adviser. And lately he's been focused on issues of Internet interoperability competition and making the Internet more open and innovative again. Next we have J. Graeber J. I. First met about six years ago as an organizer who was fighting for net neutrality, and since then she's become a formidable developer. She was one of the core team members that launched Z Cash. She loves E Cash to found her own company, a social media event platform called Happening. More recently, she's been doing a lot more research about decentralized Web protocols, everything from the Federated system to peer to peer systems to Blockchain systems and the ways in which they have strengths, weaknesses and what they need to do toe actually scale up. Next up, we have Ahmed in the paper. Ahmidan is the co founder of The Matrix Foundation and of Element, formerly known as Riot, and she has been part of the team that has been developing a open, decentralized riel time communication standard out in the open alongside thousands of open source developers. And it's a fascinating story of how they're combining social innovation and organizational innovation with technology and the ways in which there fostering a large community of open source developers next up and not not waste. We have journalist Mike Mas Nick, who is also the founder of Tector. He's been following the hottest tech debates for about two decades, and last year he threw down the gauntlet with his peace protocols, not platforms, in which he made the case for why we need to return to the early principles of the Internet of having Maurin Tropic ability and open protocols. And the piece was so influential that it influenced the Twitter Blue Sky Project, in which Twitter CEO Jack Dorsey is launching into a project to look into how the platform can develop or adopt a decentralized social media protocol. So with that Mike, welcome all the Panelists I wanna take the first question to Mike. So can you paint us a picture of how we straight away from that open, innovative, interoperable Internet of you know, 2030 years ago to today, where we're stuck with these gated walled

[0:06:41] spk_1: garden? How much time do we have? It's It's a long and somewhat depressing story, I guess. You know, I think, honestly, they're a bunch of different things and a bunch of different factors, and we can't go through them all, but more or less what what happened was the early Web showed a lot of promise, and we had sort of this dot com bubble where all sorts of interesting new projects came about. But what people quickly discovered was that it was pretty difficult. Thio build such things sustainably on. Then along came a few very successful companies that did figure out how toe build sustainable Web properties. And it was often effectively by putting up barriers and creating silos that not only collected a whole bunch of data but kept that data in and kept it only for themselves. And so you had sort of the rise of these big data silos of Google and Facebook and whatnot, and they showed how you could effectively recreate some of the promise of the early Web. But rather than doing it with open protocols where anyone can build off of it, you know, they were the controller on, they were able Thio therefore collect monopoly rents or extract excess profits from it on. That sort of paved the path for for a few other companies to come in and a bunch of other companies to effectively try and do the same. And that just became the focus and the idea of, you know, thinking about the Internet as a shared tool for everybody to build on and and to work together. That sort of went by the wayside.

[0:08:18] spk_3: Thanks, Mike. And so the next question is to Korea how? Because of this sort of profit motivated business model of the Internet, how did that translate into maybe regulations that made it that much harder to compete with them? Oh,

[0:08:42] spk_4: um, I on muted now. Great. So, yeah, I don't think the Prophet the problem is profits or even advertising per se. I think that you know the people who started the Web and the people who came later. It's not like that one was a group of noble minded people in the other group. We're a bunch of monopolists, the people who funded them, the people who gave them the money in both cases were interested in absolutely nothing but profit right. That's why that's why those bankers and insurance companies and pension funds gave the money to build things. I think the difference is what we let them get away with. I think that over 40 years and particularly accelerating over the last decade or two, we have allowed firms to become much more concentrated through tactics that were historically forbidden. It's easy to forget that there was a time in living memory prior to Ronald Reagan, which is to say, prior to the launch of the Apple two plus, they had the same launch year. They went on the campaign trail the same time there was a time when companies weren't allowed to grow by buying their competitors or buying up smaller companies that might grow to be competitors or by creating vertical monopolies where you know you run the APP store and you sell apps in the APP store in the same way that you couldn't run a rail company and also carry freight on your own rails, your toe be one of the other and that

[0:09:57] spk_2: we even had an

[0:09:58] spk_4: FTC at one point where any industry where the same company was the lead company for like more than five or six years, the FTC would presumptively often open an investigation into them for anticompetitive conduct on the grounds that any company that managed to dominate its industry for more than a couple of years at a time was probably up to no good. And when industries become really concentrated, it becomes really hard to write laws that restrict what they do. I mean, it is like, unbelievably obvious that we need a federal privacy law with a private right of action. And yet anyone you talk to on the Hill will tell you that that is a political impossibility because of the giant quantities of money spent in concert by the very small number of big tech companies that all agree on what their priorities should be. Because there's such a small number that they have the same priorities because they've converged on approximately the same business model, which has nothing to do with whether or not you're the product, right? If if paying for something didn't make you the product, then John Deere farmers would be the world's most autonomous individuals because they buy their tractors for half a million dollars, they still get roped tend to using John Deere's expensive service companies do what they can get away with. They could get away with more when they're concentrated. We started letting them concentrate 40 years ago, and that's how we got here.

[0:11:12] spk_3: Thanks, Great. And so next is J. J. As a founder of happening. You came across some of the issues of becoming a startup right in the midst of the's big platforms, and you had to deal with Facebook's A P. I. Can you talk a little bit about how you just had such a headache dealing with with Facebook's A P I

[0:11:36] spk_5: e. Myself here? Sure, yeah. So I started happening because I thought, you know, I really want an alternative to Facebook and I thought Facebook could be unbundled like it's such a large service. There's so many things roped up within it, and many people I talked to said, Oh, yeah, I don't like using Facebook anymore. I just use it for messaging and events. That was, like mainly the main use case among I guess, at least people my age. And so I started building something for events because I thought that something that you can target, there's not a lot of other messaging of that's out there, and I went ahead and just built a centralized app. Rather than trying to do something more to centralize because I think a tous level. You're really iterating on user features and user experiences. And the question is, how do you get people to use it? And oftentimes, like the decentralization features arm or at the database level, essentially for users. So I ended up focusing on this app happening, and what happened is I realize it's really hard to get access to a Facebook users friend list to just invite their friends to an event, even if they authorized my application to do it through the A. P I. Because the way it's set up is basically, um, if I would invite my friends, only my other friends who have authorized the same application will be able to show up in the APP. And so I kind of understand why Facebook does this. I mean, on their end, it's reducing their liability for third party apps, possibly spamming user friendless on bond. But it also makes it easier for them to kind of restrict third party access to their social graph, making it harder for possible competitors to bootstrap off their existing social network. And so the result of this was for whatever reason, they did it. It made it really difficult for me to give users the same kind of experience they were used to having on Facebook, because as new site, I just didn't have those network effects. I could pull their email. I could pull their phone numbers, but I couldn't pull their Facebook friends, and therefore I couldn't, you know, just let you invite your whole Facebook friend list. So going back to the centralization E went back into doing more research, particularly after, like the Twitter Blue Sky announcement, because I thought, You know what? Like this is one thing we really need, because I really wish social networks, user social graphs could just be decentralized and controlled by the user, because why doesn't work that way? Like when I make a connection with my friend on Facebook or on whatever platform, I don't intend to be having this relationship mediated forever by Facebook like I'm trying to just connect to my friend, and I would like to be able to do that ideally across multiple applications, multiple platforms and have the terms of that connection just be determined. Determined by the two of us. Because it's really between the two of us. Right? But what this would requires really more robust and widely adopted to centralized model of identity and social relationships. And I think there are some promising steps towards that right now, but we just don't have it.

[0:14:24] spk_3: Thanks, Jay. So, um, a Dean You started building matrix six years ago and you started building, uh, matrix to address some of these problems. Of these big platforms in this capture over social networks is j described. Can you talk about what those initial problems were and maybe how they have evolved over time to now?

[0:14:47] spk_6: Yes, The idea of matrix was very much to break this silos and eventually provide the communication layer to the web. Why do we have this open web on top of which anyone can make money that anyone can use that we don't have that for communication. Why are we forced to install the app that other people want us to use on De So after having trying to build messaging and voice solutions for 10 years, using either existing open protocols or building our own proprietary protocols. We thought that we have learned enough to actually try the impossible. This thing that everyone was dreaming to be thio to build on. That's when we we actually started Matrix. The idea is very much to provide very simple a p I so that you don't have to be an expert developer in messaging apps to actually build up on top of it, because that's one of the problems we've seen. Everyone thinks Decision It's easy, but it's not just sending a message. If you want actual, bigger features like group chat, history, encryption, then it starts to be quite Harry. So very simple. Ap I completely open eso that anyone can actually host it on. Then maybe we can get to a world where, as a user, I can choose the I want to use. I can choose the provider I trust with my data on everything is into an encrypted. So, uh, that's what we try to address. We've gone quite far along this way, as you said, a to beginning. There are about 20 million users on matrix on thousands of open source developers different apps building on top of it. It's being used by governments across the world. But, uh, we haven't hit yet. The mass market on people who we hope will be a bit awakened by watching things like the social media through social Vilhena on understand that maybe we should try something else in terms off how things have changed since. On one hand, you can think not much or the other. Actually, the awareness off this needs for openness, this need for control. This need for data privacy has bean growing very a lot. The main thing you can see is like, Hey, you're starting to get close set up to actually protect the users. That's can you When we started six years ago, people were looking looking at us saying, Hey, you're pretty crazy guys Now the their regulations starting to come up on. People are actually being aware off this need off unopened stand are basically for communication,

[0:17:36] spk_3: Yeah, and so, um to shift towards from these problems that were describing to maybe some of these solutions, a zoo said, people are becoming a lot more aware of the things that we need both technologically and regulatory Lee Thio. Break down some of these silos and these and lower the barrier. So in the US, the Justice Department is seeking an antitrust action towards Google. For instance, a few years ago, European regulators levied a $5 billion fine to Google. Do those sorts of, you know, regulations, those those sort of penalties on these big platforms actually solve the problem. And I wanna let anyone jump in here

[0:18:24] spk_4: so I'll jump in, I think a fine as a price, um, firms whose conduct is enabled by their scale, which makes them too big to to actually Taymor consider getting rid of are happy to pay fines. Provided that those fines are are less than the cost of doing business right that that so long as there's there's access capital left over at the end. And so when we start from the presumption that it's okay that you know, Google, a company that only ever made, like between 1.5 and 2.5 products anyone ever liked right, they made a search engine, a Hotmail clone, and depending on who you ask, the stuff that they bought when they bought android wasn't any good, and they built Android from the ground up and then everything else they've done they bought from someone else. If they're allowed to go on engaging in anticompetitive conduct, the fact that they paid a fine for doing it won't curb it. And the more finds we assess, and then the longer they get Thio to go along with doing it, the more power they will amass. And the harder it will be to imagine, do anything about it like if If we need evidence that that's how firms operate. The Vincent leaks that came out last week. $2 trillion worth of suspicious activity reports that the largest five banks in America filed with the U. S. Department of Treasury detail ing how they laundered money for the world's worst criminals. Treasury had find them repeatedly for doing this. They got fined billions. They laundered trillions. They kept hundreds of billions. Why would you ever change your conduct in the face of fines? You know, asking asking large firms to not behave like large firms to not be monopolists or it even keep track of what all the people in a firm that's so big that you can't know, no one who works there could know what everyone is doing, I think is a fool's errand,

[0:20:21] spk_3: right? And so instead of maybe just punishing them with these fines, which you call just prices of for the price of doing business there's been more action about talking about regulation that will create actual interoperability. Right? Um, in the US, there's this access act in the U. They just closed open comment period for the Digital Services Act to modernize their e commerce rules. Mike, can you talk a little bit about you know, what would it look like to create regulations that build interoperability back into the Internet?

[0:20:56] spk_1: Yeah, I think e mean, there are a lot of challenges there, and I think, unfortunately, I'm not particularly happy about any of the purchase that people are taking because I think it pushes a little bit backwards, right. I think the focus right now is how do we? The good thing is that people recognize that some level of interoperability, eyes important and some some level of being able to get your data or control your data is important, which I think is ah, huge deal. But I think the regulatory responses. How do we sort of forced companies to do that rather than How do we, Uh, how do we recognize how we got to this position in the first place? Um and so I don't think that that the approach is that people are talking about right now are going to be particularly effective. I think that, um, you know, getting rid of certain things that have gotten in the way in the past would be a much more effective tool for that. So, you know, things like the c f a A. Which, um, you know, there's there's a lot of history here, but the C f A. It was like this, officially this sort of anti hacking tool from the U. S. Government that was passed in the eighties partly in response to the movie war games. Um, it's that's been stretched and abused in in really dangerous ways, I think prevent this. And and the most obvious example of that is the power case where power was this company that was trying to build sort of a universal dashboard for all your different social media properties, and one of things that they did was if you had if you want to use power and you wanted Thio, Um, look at you know your Facebook account along with all these other accounts power asked you to give. Give them your Facebook credentials on dis. Was your your permission just toe extract your data from Facebook and bring it into power. And Facebook sued Power and said that it was a C FAA violation and they won the case, went on for a very long time and effectively destroyed power in the process. Um, you know, if we had had a different ruling in that case and it allowed companies at the the user's own request to go in and and pull out your data and use it in a different way and create interoperability that way, I think that is a much more important deal than trying toe sort of layer on another thing that says, Okay, we're going to add a new regulation. We're going to ignore all the regulations that already exists. We're going to just have this new regulation that says you have to be interoperable, and I think on top of that, the way it's being done is often ways that will effectively lock in. It's creating a new sort of regulatory burden that the big companies have compliance staffs and lawyers, and they can all deal with it and smaller companies will find it more and more difficult. And so we again sort of lock ourselves in to these big companies and assume that that that's the way things are done. And as long as we just regulate those companies, um, you know everything is OK, but what that does is locks out competition and locks out other approaches.

[0:23:56] spk_5: Yeah, I want to jump in here and just say I agree with Mike on this. And having tried to single handedly built and run a little social media startup, I could definitely see how difficult it would be to say comply with certain, you know, requirements I would have to have around a P. I was like, You know, I haven't even built in a P I for happening, and it's just because I'm the only person doing all of it, and I think a lot of these projects are in a similar place where there's like one or two people doing all the work to try to establish a foothold for like a small competitors on when you have new regulation that might introduce lots of regulations that would be good for larger companies. Comply with, you know, like privacy interoperability. But then it becomes very hard for startups and thinking that maybe in some ways like this kind of onerous regulation would be something Facebook would even welcome as a new cost of doing business because it kind of prices their competitors out of the market. And it's something they could totally afford. And it's really better for them because it just entrenches the remote even more.

[0:24:50] spk_1: And in fact, they've said they've said more or less that they welcome this this kind of regulation because they know that, you know, and and, to some extent, to go back a little bit. Thio Thio What Corey said at the beginning, I know we were encouraged before this panel to disagree with each other, so I'm going to disagree with Corey, even though I always, you know, appreciate Corey's thoughts and learned so much from Corey and Corey knows this very well. Um, you know, he started out by saying that, you know, we need this privacy law with the private right of action. Ah, private right of action scares me to death. Frankly, you know, I understand the thinking behind it, and I understand why we want it. But I also see how setting that up could lead to a ton of abusive litigation that completely buries smaller companies and completely makes it impossible on. You know, I don't know if there is a solution in there where you can limit it to certain types of companies, but, um, I worry about things where you know, we we burden the smaller competitors with, you know, with with regulations or litigation that that basically snows them under. Whereas the bigger companies can just, you know, chalk it up is an expense

[0:25:58] spk_3: omitting. Um, could you come in here? Because Europe takes a different approach to the US, right? In the US, we already have a draft law, this access act, and we just have this open comment period. So there's still a lot of flexibility right around what the Digital Services Act might look like. Um, could you maybe give us maybe a hopeful picture? Like what? In what ways could this regulation be positive to help you know something like Matrix,

[0:26:25] spk_6: So I'm not sure I'm going to be able to give a picture, because yeah, I shall be the worries that, like, mentioned here, but I would like to share more to take that we were having on this, which is more that by building an open stoned out, which is managed by a non for profit foundation, which is going to be the one responsible to actually make sure that the standard is aligned with the various regulations. If and then they come up then as small startups who actually want to build on top of it, then it's easy you provide an easy tool for people to build it on one. When we started Matrix one off, the idea was to reproduce the model we had with email more initially in the standards were very desperate. They ended up with SMTP and just Microsoft being on the side and refusing to actually use SMTP until today were the users actually voted with their faith? Hey guys, I want to send an email outside my company. How how do I do that if you're not using SMTP and they were forced to actually get there and that's very much the approach we're doing. So we're building matrix. It's we have a fraction app, which is called Element. On top of it, we're encouraging as many people as possible to build on top of matrix on. We're basically growing the level off the ocean so that at some point the big islands off the WhatsApp, etcetera. We look like dinosaurs because everyone would be like, Hey, guys, how come when I use what's up, I cannot communicate with all my friends, which are on the other side, So that's very mature. The approach we're taking because I agree with regulations on bond finds etcetera is quite complicated to set up. It's not black or white. You always have lobbying as well in there. So the main, the main way we're going to solve this, I believe, is if the users actually realize what's happening. If, as technologies we actually build solutions which are built on talk of an open standard on, then then we can move the world forward

[0:28:31] spk_3: so you're sort of building matrix so that interoperability is the main feature.

[0:28:36] spk_6: Yes, the interoperability. The centralization is the main feature of matrix so that you can really choose who you trust with your data. Basically, as a user on anyone can build on top of it on anyone, all these APS we'll talk from between one another.

[0:28:53] spk_4: Can I chime in with maybe a middle ground between, uh, interoperability and, uh, and mandatory interoperability, which is the competitive compatibility, right? The idea that if you look at the history of technology, uh, all of the allegedly like non overturn herbal network effects that are supposed to entrench permanent advantage have often been turned on their heads by new market entrants that made compatible products interoperable products. So whether that was Apple reverse engineering all of Microsoft's office format and making I work so that rather than the fact that there's this giant Microsoft installed base being a network effect that Apple has to overcome, they all become people whom Apple customers can share documents with seamlessly, or whether it's Microsoft itself. You know, taking advantage of the fact that IBM was under a consent decree, didn't, uh, want to make the operating system for its PCs and therefore having all of this diversity of hardware vendors that it could sell operating systems to, you know, the network effects are often two edged swords, where, rather than having a walled garden, the incumbent actually ends up having a kind of corral of a prey animals that new predators can come and hunt for new customers that they can come and hunt for. And the thing that they need is the freedom to make interoperable products without facing legal sanction. And one of the things that the concentrated industries have done in the years since they all use competitive compatibility to gain this advantage is to shut it off. So Mike talked about how power was shut down by Facebook. Facebook had a product a lot like powers that would log into my space for you and get your waiting MySpace messages and put them in your Facebook inbox and let you reply to your MySpace friends from Facebook. You know, the sauce for the goose has never sauce for the gander. When they did it, it was the, you know, legitimate progress of a new industry, and when we do it to them, it's piracy and and we all know that story. And I think that one of the things we can imagine, rather than just having this um, that interoperability mandates be the ceiling is that they might be the floor, right? This is the least that everyone has to support. You know this, a p I or whatever. But the ceiling would be whatever it is your competitors can figure out how to do, provided they don't violate some other law, like a privacy law

[0:31:20] spk_6: ability building healthy ecosystem, where you have different off Frank's with each their own specific value. Add a Z user. I choose the one which matters the most for me on healthy competition for the wind, right? Yeah. Dynamic dynamism. Mhm.

[0:31:38] spk_3: So with the movies, the social dilemma, right? One of the main issues here is this issue of moderation. And so if we have a wider ecosystem of players, especially those that are decentralized, many of them are decoupling that relationship between the client and the server or, in other words, the app and the server, right? What you see, and then the data and how it's stored is really becoming separated with many of these decentralized systems. And what

[0:32:07] spk_2: are the

[0:32:07] spk_3: implications of that? Legally right? We have this whole legal regime that acts as if the Internet is Facebook, Google and Instagram. They its's based upon this idea that you have a, you know, huge army of lawyers. I could deal with takedowns. I could deal with moderation, Things like that. Yeah. How would a decentralized system deal with this? What are some ideas that we need to explore to make sure that this works better? This is an open question.

[0:32:39] spk_1: I could jump in first, I guess. You know, I think part of it is that we don't We don't know, right? I mean, part of the idea behind staying having ah, decentralized or interoperable system is that it allows for really great experimentation, right? And you have that competition that I'm Indian was just talking about, and and the dynamism that Cory was just talking about that allows for experiments because right now, you know, effectively, we're locked into just a very few experiments, and they're very interesting experiments based on these giant silence of data and the ability to run, you know, different machine learning algorithms off of them or to throw, you know, 10 20,000 content moderators at them. Um, but, you know, those kinds of models only work for those giant companies And I think what's interesting to me about a de centralized or distributed or, you know, protocol based system is that it would allow for all this experimentation. Like I'm Indian said, where different, You know, different companies or different developers can build on and and see what works. And, you know, part of the issues we don't know, you know, and I should be clear here. You know, I've talked a lot about this, and I think that, um you know, ah, protocol based system is really important and would help do that experimentation. But I don't think that it alone is the solution. I don't think that if we just went to this, you know, this kind of world that, you know, suddenly the questions and the debate and the concerns about content moderation go away because they don't. But it allows for this this experimentation and these different approaches, and we can begin to see things that are different than expecting that you know, these giant companies that are within a 40 mile radius of where I'm sitting, hiring, you know, thousands of content moderators and trying to throw a I at it that that is the only possible solution to the content. Moderation question.

[0:34:38] spk_5: Yeah, I just wanted to jump in and add that I think a lot of these attempts towards solutions like, you know, increased interoperability, architectural, technical, decentralization, even antitrust, which is more like political decentralization of the company's decision making structure and entities that control these platforms. All of these really just trying to get more alternatives out there and more alternatives at the the whole platform level. Um, some other possibilities could even be just approaching particular aspects of how you know moderation of creation is done within the companies and allowing third parties Thio access. Um, And through that, you know, perhaps new a p i s or new ways of presenting interfaces to the user. And, for example, there's this interesting testimony by Stephen Wolfram before Congress, where he suggested, you know, let's say like we don't manage to, you know, break up these companies or to centralized social media. What if we just had, like, automated content selection marketplaces? So third parties could run content selection in moderation, a eyes and so you might still have, like, monolithic social networks. But maybe there's marketplaces of AI feeds and then users can choose between these. And you can do this by providing, like, you know, you have, like, final ranking providers and constraint providers who, um, put some of the features all the data out there for third party companies to, like, you know, rearrange and present back to the user in different ways. Another interesting idea that's emerged from the Cryptocurrency space is this idea of, like content prediction markets, and so that could be used for curation or moderation purposes. So essentially, you kind of crowd source, um, that make content moderation like a micro task where tons of people can participate and say if they expect that a piece of content is going to eventually be deleted by a moderator, they will place a small bet on that content being bleated. And if they're right, they win that bet and get money. So just like random ideas like this, which I think there's a lot of these kinds of ideas out there that attack just certain pieces of the problem. And if you think about how do you open up the data and open up the you know, uh, a P i s from where we're at now to move towards that those air steps towards the helpful direction.

[0:36:52] spk_4: I think that giving having, ah, multiplicity of places that you can turn to to act as your proxy in deciding what you see on in what order you see, it is really key, right? That what we want to self determination and ultimately, self determination that is always gonna be hard to get because you're gonna have to find a community that agrees with you about what the norm should be. And if you're not a tool, Smith, you're gonna have thio convey your requirements to a tool Smith and incentivize them to make it. And so all of those I'm not going to pretend that, like moving moderation closer to the people who are being moderated, will solve all of our problems. But we don't have any hope of solving any of them for so long as we are asking for large firms to come up with, um, moderation schemes that satisfy the needs of all their users. I mean, the problem with Facebook is not merely that Mark Zuckerberg is, like, singularly unqualified to be the Lord High executioner of 2.6 billion people's social lives. It's that no one should have that job right? You know? Ah, 150 countries, 150 languages, thousands of community norms, lots of different use cases, lots of different threat models. Um, you know, you look at Twitter, which has a policy, for example, that you can't use screenshots to report harassment cause they're too easy to forge. Well, that's great, except that there's a bunch of really terrible dudes who harass women in comics by sending them really crappy Dems, deleting them and then sending public timeline messages that reference those deleted Dems, but that you can't or don't actually cross Twitter's threshold unless you have seen the deleted D M privately. And so they could do continuous, ongoing harassment and stay below thresh, the threshold for enforcement at Twitter. But if those people could choose toe, have their own instance, that was Federated with Twitter. Whether or not Twitter approved of that federation, they could among themselves, agree on a norm that they trusted each other enough. Thio treat screenshots as evidence of harassment and bar all of those users communiques from their own server, um without having to adopt that for all of Twitter's users.

[0:39:02] spk_6: Yeah, that's very much the approach we're taking with Matrix as well. So we have way have a project which is actually built what we call morally relative reputation, where basically, you could subscribe Thio other people's greatest people. You agree with people you trust eso that it applies. They're filtering on the kind of things you want to see, the kind of people you want to talk thio to you as well. We we've already implemented it in for for pure moderation in terms off banning servers and this kind of things. I think the important thing Thio add to that is, while it's good for people because it's protecting them, there is also this risk off creating even more. The bubbles on what we need to get right and is going to be super hard is actually show people whether standing the rest of the world. So basically you have a world. This is where you stand in terms off. I want to hear what whoever Trump has to say. Then I listen to it, But hey, look what happens if I take my pin and put it on the other side of the world and hear what the others have to say or you are aligned with 0.5% of the population the rest of the world completely disagree with you on. I think what we're missing we're going to need is really make sure that people hear the other side of the story. Otherwise, we're back into this big bubbles. Uh, how to solve that is going to be

[0:40:31] spk_3: right, and and so we're talking a lot about having when we have a more decentralized, interoperable system will be ableto have more experimentation. Of course, that also means making the moderation systems closer to the end user. And not this big centralized system that has all of this power to decide what is acceptable content. What is not, which is just based upon, You know, all these thousands of people locked in rooms that are moderating thes spaces and also many of these top down decisions that are based upon laws. And, you know, in some countries that have very, you know, antiquated laws around free, free expression and things like that. So you know, what kinds of maybe organizations do We need, um, that to make this possible. I wanna shift us, Teoh. You know what brings you hope? In the next 10 years, what kinds of organizations? What kinds of movement do we need to move us towards this path of having better systems where we actually have spaces where we communicate where we're learning Things were connecting to people genuinely. And we're not getting harassed and abused And all those things. What I wanted to ask each of you to comment on. What brings you hope in the next 10 years? Um, I want to go. Who wants to go first? J from the Colonial.

[0:41:52] spk_5: Hear me? OK, I'll go first. I think one of the things that's giving me hope is some observations I've made recently of people moving away from large public conversations on Twitter and Facebook moving into more private things through private slacks, discords, mailing lists, sub stacks like this isn't the ideal situation. But I think this is kind of a natural centralization that's happening as people migrate to share communities. Um, like their interests and things like this, and like seeing them or the seeing this fragmentation happening makes me wonder if it is possible to you know, re consolidate around an open protocol this time that ties together a lot of these disparate messaging chat platforms like Maybe you know, Matrix already is doing that for chat, maybe like expanding it to many other use cases that include more of social media is a possibility. In the near horizon, something else is emerging work around a centralized identities, standards. There's E, D s and other forms of just centralized at any protocols that have been worked on by the W three C recently, and I think seeing something like that emerged that could get widely adopted. I'm seeing a lot of adoption happening in the Cryptocurrency space right now. But, like also by Maura Peer to peer social media apps and things like that that could enable this kind of vision of a more decentralized ecosystem in which many different applications can interact with the same users. Data and users, data and relationships can be more controlled by the user themselves.

[0:43:22] spk_6: Just to be clear, matrix can work perfectly well for social video. It's just a matter of building the up on top of it, which that it

[0:43:32] spk_3: right, I mean, isn't social media. Just one big chat room, sort of twitter, that is, um who wants to go next, Mike? Yeah.

[0:43:44] spk_1: All right. Sure. I've been called on. Uh, so I

[0:43:48] spk_2: think I think there

[0:43:49] spk_1: are a lot of things that give me hope. I mean, the fact that we're here on that there, however many people watching this and having this discussion. And I've, you know, I've been talking about this for a few years and obviously, you know, wrote that big paper last year, and that got a lot of attention. And every time I write about it or talk about it, I have more and more people reaching out to me and wanting to talk more about it. Um, that gives me hope, right? I mean, this wasn't something that I I tossed out there, and I certainly didn't coming up with it whole cloth. Everybody else. Lots of other people, including people here, uh, you know, in the group, on stage and and watching all had these ideas and everybody sort of built on it. And, you know, we're continuing to sort of refined and move towards something better. Um and so I'm excited about that. It's not like this idea was out there and everyone's like, No, not gonna work right There are some people who say that, but there's so many people who are trying things and working on things, I think where still a long way off. I know that every time I talk about this, a t least three people will reach out to me after this and say, I've built the solution, Andi, that's generally not the way this works. You know, there hasn't been one single solution, certainly in just in looking at adoption, which is is sort of the next big key pieces, figuring out how do we actually get people to do these things? But I think all of the things that Jay brought up are exactly right that, you know, people are looking for something on. Do we see that? And people are finding it in different places on. So I think the next 10 years we're going to be a lot of interesting experimentation. Onda. Hopefully that moves us towards something better. And I hope on the side of that that you know, the regulatory side of things does help and doesn't make things worse, though I that I'll put in a little bit of fear. I do fear that we're going to go the wrong way with some of the some of the regulatory approaches

[0:45:48] spk_3: before I goto. Next time we're going to go into the audience Q and A in just a few minutes. So if you have any questions, uh, put it in the chat right there. So a Madden, what is your vision of hope?

[0:46:01] spk_6: So the fact that awareness is basically growing is my big hope. Yeah, than every time a regulation is going out there. There is communication around. It's more and more people are actually talking about it writing about it, and this is great on. I hope this is going to continue growing on the fact that we do have tools to experiment with where they were super excited. Thio eventually managed to start building this reputation system, see where it can go on work with the rest of the open source, um, ecosystem bit matrix or others. Thio solve this whole fake news. Misinformation on demand on the actually get somewhere. So we have people we have the tech on. Awareness is growing so we can get somewhere. It's just a matter off doing it.

[0:46:53] spk_4: Curry. Yeah, I think the thing that gives me hope and I've talked about this another Internet archive events is that people who are upset that the Web has turned into like five giant websites, each filled with screenshots of the other four are starting to figure out that they're not alone, right. We live in a world with five publishers, four movie studios, three record companies to beer companies and one eyewear company, like dominating their industries, one movie theater, one e commerce site and so on. And that all of these, they

[0:47:28] spk_2: have a

[0:47:28] spk_4: common cause. Right then, it's not. It's not that tech is run by super geniuses or supervillains. It's, you know, because if it was, then we wouldn't see the consolidation and professional wrestling, which is definitely not run by super geniuses. And and so I think that if we wanna understand what's going on, we have to look to these big structural factors that are changing. And

[0:47:48] spk_2: part of

[0:47:48] spk_4: what we're here to talk about today is misinformation. And I think that the explanatory power of conspiracy theories is really under theorized that like

[0:48:00] spk_2: when you

[0:48:00] spk_4: live in a world where every industry is concentrated into so few hands that they effectively get to write their own regulations on when those regulations create enormous actual harms and trauma. I think about people who are trying to live through the lock down with 20th century broadband, and we had Frontier go bankrupt in the middle of the lock down. One of the things we learned in their bankruptcy filings is that they had three million households. They could have profitably connected 100 gigabit broadband that they were the only company that served, that they would have made $800 million on a $1 billion investments at 1.8 billion in total over 10 years. And they chose not to do it toe lose money over 10 years because the analysts who dominate the share prices of their industry don't give good ratings to any cap ex. With more than five years, recoup and the executives in the company were paid in stock and so their personal compensation would go down. Three million families air now trying to survive the pandemic, locked indoors with DSL made out of copper that was installed in the seventies because of frontiers, bad incentives and lack of competition.

[0:49:09] spk_2: We have

[0:49:10] spk_4: common cause, right, and that's how we make a difference. You know, Jamie Boyle says that before the word ecology was coined, there were 1000 issues owls, ozone, layer the you know, freshwater, saltwater and whatever. And it was 1000 atomized issues. But the term ecology well did 1000 issues together into a single movement with 1000 ways to get involved. And we are not going to solve tech with tech. Tech will be part of the solution. We're going to solve tech with a change in the way that we govern firms. And we're going to get that change by making common cause with their brothers and sisters, who are angry that their kids are going to university, where two textbook monopolists have raised prices 10,000% and they're gonna make common cause of people are angry that their local emergency room has been bought by Private Equity fund that's bought every other emergency care facility for 20 miles and has raised prices thousands of percent. We're gonna make common cause with people who are angry because there's only two companies making all the beer and one company controlling all the wrestling, right? And that's how we're going to make a difference.

[0:50:13] spk_3: Thank you so much for, you know, excellent. So I wanna move Thio Audience questions. Wendy, have you seen some? Would like Thio read some out loud?

[0:50:24] spk_2: Sure. Here's a question from James for the Panelists. What have you learned about getting these benefits to resonate with real users on the street? What's the level of utility we need to get to before we could be a credible alternative to the mainstream maps rather than just uncomfortable trade off for the privacy conscience

[0:50:46] spk_1: I'll jump in. I think that's a really, really important question. And I think that one of the one of the problems is that we do. And this is natural. And it's the way. Sort of every, um, evolution of technology seems to work is that the first thing that we do is recreate what was already there on often do in a clunky way, right? This is sort of the classic innovator's dilemma to some extent, Um, and so that's it's very difficult to get people thio, use it thio use things based on that. If we're just recreating Twitter or just recreating Facebook and doing in a distributed way. They're really, Honestly, whether we like it or not, there aren't enough people who care, um, to make that big enough to matter S O. You know, the next stage of it is has to be enabling the kinds of powerful things that were not able to be done before that the kinds of things that Facebook would not do by itself, that Google would not do by itself, that Twitter would not do by itself. Um, I don't know exactly what those are because there's a lot of different areas that you could go down, and I don't know which one is going to resonate the most. But I think you know that if we really want to get people to use these things, we have to come up with what is unique and different. That a distributed, decentralized platform enables in a creative way that almost, you know, goes up against the things that the big companies already do. That they cannot move down that path, and they cannot copy that effectively. It was sort of undermine their their way of being, um and that creates some new values new benefit that goes way beyond just recreating what is already there. Because if you're just recreating YouTube, you know YouTube is going to beat you at that. But if you could do something that allows for something more powerful built on something like a YouTube, people will follow you there.

[0:52:37] spk_6: So strangely enough, with thought quite a lot about this Yeah, I agree that basically what the rest, like the clothes company are actually providing is the baseline. You have to have the user experience, which is as good as, like, what's up company. You have thio, get thio this level off usability. What you're going to bring their is the fact that your your network So it means that people, you're not forcing people you're talking to to actually use the same mapas you do on. Then if you have a ecosystem which is vibrant enough, then you have multiple APS doing multiple things in very specific ways on all these APS with its will each bring their own their own users into this network. And that's the kind one off the different shader. But you need to get to a level of network which is as big as what the others have with the level of usability, which is as big as what the other had.

[0:53:37] spk_2: Here's another question to the Panelists. Should we be building alternative or complementary infrastructure

[0:53:51] spk_1: on our path?

[0:53:52] spk_4: Yeah, I actually wanted to weigh in on the last one, but this this works well. Ah, I think that, um if you actually look at the history of where a lot of new technologies came from, they came by plugging something new into something that existed that fixed something that the old company didn't wanna make That you know, if the old company gives away razor blades and gives away handles and charges for razor blades, the new company comes along and, uh, and gives away razor blades right and fights them, beat them at their own game. You have, For example, Lexmark sued static controls in the early two thousands for refilling and re engineering their toner cartridges thes to charge more for, you know, loose carbon powder than it would have cost if it had been in diamond form. And, uh, and Lexmark just reverse engineered at survived the lawsuit. Currently, they are, or rather static controls this Taiwanese company reverse engineered to survive the lawsuit. Currently, they own Lexmark, right? Like I think that, um, you know, figuring out how to make Facebook better is the first step to getting people to not use Facebook rightto being a thing where that eats Facebook's lunch, that goes where Facebook dare not go right on. Ad blocker for Facebook that scraped everything that you might want to read from Facebook and then presented it to you in a non tracking environment So Facebook couldn't gather behavioral data would be a really powerful way to use Facebook, and lots of people would do it because that part they like about Facebook is the part where they see their friends and stuff they're interested in. The part they don't like is where they're spied on all the time, and you could just give them the one without the other. And what stands in the way are is the thicket of laws that prevent interoperability. I

[0:55:35] spk_5: wanted to temp into One thing I was thinking is, um, trying to formalize what I think are the most. The highest utility things into centralization can offer users. I think it's offline. First functionality. I think it's privacy and data ownership, although those air more abstract in many cases. And then there's censorship resistance. And that doesn't just mean government censorship. But, you know, platform's censorship. And I think those air the main things, um, that new platforms can offer, but also by thinking about ways in which platforms that have a different business model because, say they're not building the same kind of moat. How what could they offer? So, for example, being more opened interoperability because it is a decentralized protocol rather than trying to close off users, Interoperability itself can be a huge, uh, bonus for users if they can reach their friends across all different types forms. A songs were able to do that, of course, Andan. Another thing I've been thinking is that there are maybe instead of looking and recreating services of the past, I feel like a lot of decentralized protocols keep going in and trying toe, you know, recreate, you know, Twitter or like microblogging or stuff. That was really like the peak of social networking 5 to 10 years ago, as opposed toe looking at emerging new interfaces like what about, you know, forms of video social networking like tick tock and, you know, things that are much more interactive. Or what about the that? You know, I think you know, stuff that gather towns really cool that just like spatial videoconferencing. And what about stuff going on in V r A r. Can you get in ahead of these new technologies and try to set something in place? That express is more of a vision of the Web you want as it evolves forward. So instead of, say, the snow crash world in which everything in a ar VR is owned by one company, how do you have, like, a decentralized space, like, you know, to Central and to try to do or something another spaces like coyote things? I've seen Amazon starting this thing called sidewalk, which is there, like a bunch of like coyote devices in the neighborhood that they'll connect using Bluetooth and give you more connectivity this way. And this is really a dream of a lot of like mesh networking advocates, I think. And now that Amazon is doing it in the highly centralized way, it kind of like take some of that excitement out of it. But, you know, I'm worried that they'll get their first for some of the offline first functionality that you know, local first to centralized APs or networks can offer.

[0:57:58] spk_2: Here's another question for J. Actually, you've done an overview of decentralized social media. APS. What are the open questions that they have yet to answer that are preventing them for reaching scale?

[0:58:11] spk_5: Uh, well, OK, so I think one of the biggest ones is business models. How do you get this positive feedback loop of a business model that lets you invest more into the business and grow it and grow the platform? Like a lot of these things are donation run or their, um, funded through another company or like some other source of money That's not related. Thio. You know the APP itself, making money. And so how do you create a de centralized business model in a decentralized apparatus centralized environment? I think that's one of the really big open questions to tackle. And so even just experimentation, basically with the same things and just different business models could be really useful like, say, you know, mastodons. But throwing this different business models, see if that works. Okay, I think that would be really useful in trying to figure out what could work long term for the space. Another big thing, I think, is identity. Like I was saying earlier, like social graph for all sorts of like inter optically operability purposes. It's like the unifying thread for the user online and really like maybe one of the original sense of the Web was, you know, not really figuring out early on not to say that they could have. But how do you figure out, you know, way toe create identity as, like a core protocol level thing that you know browsers would support, as opposed to being something that got implemented mostly on top in social networking app that now owner online identity andan Another one is definitely moderation because I don't think decentralized APS just magically solved a central assault. Moderation, like they give you more options for playing with different strategies. But whenever these decentralized acts have started to reach the scale at which moderation really becomes a problem, like I think, you know, in the mastodons and matrix community, it's reached that level. Although a lot of the smaller ones still have mostly, you know, uh, well intentioned hobbyist users and not like serious, malicious actors. But once you reach that scale, what are the tools you need to moderate effectively? And I think that is still an area of ongoing experimentation. Research

[1:00:06] spk_2: A question from Eva How does it move towards wider adoption of decentralized Web intersect with the increasing national isolationism of technology around the world. For example, see, the U. S is moved to block Huawei Bite dance commuted.

[1:00:31] spk_4: Sorry, I'm used to using my hardware mute button. I recommend them to everyone. Uh, so the there's a story that goes that we need national champions to save us from China, right, that we need these big firms that will that will joust with, you know, we bow and whatnot and I think that this ignores history. You know, Tim Wu had a very good essay about this when he talked about the history of the A, T and T break up. Whereas A T and T was being broken up, Japan's electronic industry was making serious inroads into the global electron ICS marketplace that had heretofore been dominated by the US It was a source of gigantic anxiety that America was gonna lose the tech race to Japan and they said, How can we break up a T and T? They're going to If we break them up, then we won't have a champion to fight for us and defend us from Japan. And what actually happened when we broke up A T and T is the company was no longer allowed to stop us from plugging modems into the phone line, right? That

[1:01:27] spk_2: turned out to

[1:01:28] spk_4: be pretty good for American technology and competition. So, you know, to the extent that there are these these, um that there, these people are playing this game where they're like, What we need is this giant clanking, slow moving tank that is itself, like hamstrung by its own organizational inertia and also is wound into so many of our like policy domains that anything they do to change just, you know, has all these stakeholders in the government that makes they come and shout at them and so on. Those people are going to get, you know, completely overrun by smaller, nimbler firms that are not beholden to the interests of shareholders of the winners the last tech lottery, but instead are trying to make the very best tech. That is possible.

[1:02:15] spk_6: Yeah, actually, if you rely on open source open standards, then you can actually have complete control off where and how and who is building it askew say the small people can actually get control as well. And they, um, the small companies and the open source projects actually don't are not beholden to the big to the big investors.

[1:02:39] spk_1: Yeah, I think the other thing is, if you look at, you know, the mechanism by which, um, the Commerce Department is trying to block wechat and tick tock. You know, that only works when you're dealing with big centralized players. If you have sort of smaller distributed, decentralized players, uh, it becomes much more difficult to have nation states come in and say you could no longer use those those APS here. You know, there are certain mathematicians and certain things that can happen. But, you know, the more centralized it is, the easier it is to block a swell.

[1:03:14] spk_5: Yeah, I think something like talk. The concern is that, you know, it's so centralized that it's also, you know, perhaps got back door to the Chinese centralized government who is able to peek into the centralized app. And really, ultimately, I think what we're seeing is kind of a test of models, technological models being played out at the national level. So China is gone, just like full centralization, Everything centralized. We'll just nominated winner in this category. And now you know, Alibaba rules this right and that way it's easier for the centralized government to manage and everything, and the U. S. Has many very large centralized companies to. But what I guess a lot of people in the U. S. To care about democracy and competition and, you know, resilience of like a diversity of approaches are trying to do is to get, you know, more alternatives out there. How can we do things with more voices, more democratically, more smaller competitors, as opposed to just having one winner in each category and then just having them face off? And so the real success in the long run, I think, is if in the U. S. Weaken, where the West in general, we can foster like a more of a ecosystem of smaller, you know, more competitive products and projects and companies that can kind of do an end run around these models that China is going. And I guess what I fear is going down the path where we just end up in the same situation. Thinking the only way to, you know, successfully moderate speech in the US and to successfully compete economically with China is to have the exact same business models that they do have, like one big monolithic social network or whatever company that the U. S. Government has a lot of influence over. That I think is the worst outcome in which basically, we all go down that path globally, as opposed to having more alternatives.

[1:04:59] spk_2: Our final question is from attacking Paul Lindner. Who asks, Is anyone else out there worried that we have too much tech solution is, um, for social problems? Yes. Uh, e

[1:05:17] spk_1: mean, um, there are a few different ways to answer this question, but I think it is an important question, and it is worth thinking about, Right? Um, there, you know, it is difficult to separate out. Um, which of these problems air societal cultural problems and which of them are the technology sort of emphasizing those societal and cultural problems. And this is a debate that could go on forever and potentially is not all that interesting. But I think it is important Thio think through and to recognize that. Andi, I don't think I know that. Ah, lot of the conversation here just because of the framing. It was very much about the technology solution is, um, to some extent, like, you know, can we build these thes alternatives? Um, but I don't think any, you know, you know, I know all of my my co Panelists. I don't think any of us are thinking that way. I think we all recognize that there are societal and cultural issues underlying all of this. Um, the fact is, well, I'll speak for myself, not everybody else. I don't know how to solve the cultural and societal problems I can have an impact on the technology on. Therefore, I'm going to push on that element while recognizing that, Yes, there obviously are much larger societal and cultural issues that that are really at play here on if anyone has a good solution to those as well. Um, all ears would be happy. Toe, listen.

[1:06:40] spk_6: Yeah, I think we need a social. People who know about society to work together with the technologies because everything which happens on nine has to be solved by some level of technical solutions. Right. But we definitely need some input from the social side on on the first side, what we see online is a reflect of what you can see. Uh, in reality is that you can experiment online and actually try to force on bond, expand out in the reality as well and learn from it.

[1:07:13] spk_5: Yeah, just to jump in. I think we're grappling Aziz a society and as a culture right now with changes caused by new technologies. And there are different, you know, social approaches to the ways that we deal with this and, you know, rearrange, reorganize things. Um, just outside of the new structures themselves that have introduced a lot of these changes, but then also thinking about how those structures are built and how we can change them to also have downstream in fact, impacts on what kind of social structures air possible. What kind of rearrangements air possible that's like that, I think, is a really interesting place to be on bits. Also, I think there's, um probably this, like a probably easier to get started with some of these little experimental solutions, right? Because you don't have to get mass social consensus to push legislative solutions forward. If you just say, start a new open source project that aims to create a new kind of, you know, interoperability your identity standard or something these things can be played with and, you know, attempted to work at a smaller scale. So there's more like a single person can do. Thio create this kind of change. In my opinion,

[1:08:25] spk_4: I want to propose ah, highly selective brand of tech exceptionalism that we should all consider following. Uh, it's that on the one hand, tech is definitely exceptional, right? So it has thes two characteristics that make it very exceptional. The first one is that, um, tech is, uh, universal, right? It has the this universal turing completeness. It has this universal, nondiscriminatory network capability, which means that tech has an interoperability capability that is not present in other technologies. You know, Edison used to sell phono grams that had special spindle holes and warning, saying that if you try to put it on someone else's record player, that he'd come after you. But you know he he had that, like hardware incompatibility. That was

[1:09:11] spk_2: kind of

[1:09:12] spk_4: hard to overcome, whereas with software, it's just software, right? Although it's, you know, when your iPhone refuses to run an app that Apple hasn't checked the I approved box on, it's not because it can't run it. It's because it won't right. We have that universality, and so that is exceptional. It's distinct from other industries and other domains. And the other way in which tech exceptional is that it touches so much of everything else, right? If we're gonna organize a better world about where we address the climate crisis or where we address inequality or any of the other problems that we have, we're going to fight and win or lose those battles on a technological battleground, right that it's it's not sufficient to change our social problems. But without it, the battle is lost. It is necessary. But

[1:09:58] spk_2: there's one way

[1:09:58] spk_4: in which technology is not exceptional, which is that it's not a substitute for governance, right? That that you know the the caricature of the old cipher punk dream that we find a key length that it's so long that we can use it to build a kind of cryptographic lee secure demimonde that we can shelter under, while oppressive and unresponsive and illegitimate states form outside of our Impenetrable bubble. It's always been a nabs erred idea, because rubber hose crypt analysis is not a thing that you prevent with longer keys. If you want the police to not tie you to a chair and hit you with a rubber hose until you tell them what your past phrases we need, the rule of law and what technology can do. And what cryptography and privacy tools can do is give us a temporary respite where we can hope that we don't make a single mistake that allows our adversaries to gain entry while our adversaries look for just one mistake that they use to invalidate our efforts. And from that temporary shelter we can organize to build permanent structural changes that give us the responsive, legitimate democracies that air really ultimately are only hedge against bad activity.

[1:11:13] spk_5: I was reading this book recently, called What the Internet Could Have Been, and I think it's also important to not forget that in the grand scale of technological change, the Internet is so new and I mean, literally its inventors air still coming to D Web conferences like Vince Serf, you know, And you know, we're able to rub shoulders with the people you know, the Giants, whose sure we'll rub elbows with the Giants on whose shoulders we now stand. Someone said Right, So it's like we're so close to the very origins of this technology that it's far too early for us to say, Oh, well, I guess everything is centralized and now just a few companies rule this whole space because it's been like that for 10 years. I mean, 10 years is nothing like we have so much more opportunity to change this right now. So that's why I think that in particular at this point in time in history, it's really important to focus on some of the tech solutions here because the tech has not fully solidified yet and we still have time to change it before it touches literally everything in the world and all our houses and cars, and every device is part of the Internet, which no longer exists is the Internet because it's just everything right?

[1:12:10] spk_3: That's a great Segway J. For my closing question, which is, you know, you just said that there is time to change this. We can do this. It's still very new. What can people dio to do to help with that? We have a whole audience of activists and developers and researchers who are looking into these questions. For each of you wanna ask, maybe one or two pieces of, you know, action that they could take to help bring this new Internet board. And Jay, you want to go first?

[1:12:41] spk_5: Sure. Okay, so I would say Just try alternatives. I mean, try Macedonian, try matrix, try them out, and then then give feedback because, ah, lot

[1:12:53] spk_2: of these

[1:12:53] spk_5: big companies do everything through a B testing extensively every single feature. Their teams of 200 people dedicated toe, adding features and detecting problems. A lot of these small alternative projects are run by, like, 1 to 10 people who are doing all the coding, you know, and they don't have time to figure everything out. And so if you try them out and then you give feedback on what you liked, what you didn't like what you would like to see what you think your friends and family would use it like what features If they added, your friends and family would use it. That is a huge contribution to these projects. I think, like filed bug reports, file feature requests, do things like that on, then something else I would say is just support regulation to be really support Good regulation, to be really careful about thinking, thinking through the effects on like smaller start ups and smaller competitors. So I think that there's like a nen stink tive desire to support any kind of regulation that comes down the line. It's like, Oh, yes, privacy interoperability. We want those things, but it's like, How are those achieved? And is that something that is just a regulatory costs that Facebook can absorb, but smaller ones Can't

[1:13:53] spk_3: mike a pass it to you, then? Yeah,

[1:13:57] spk_1: Uh, sure, J stole my my entire answers, but, uh, yeah, that's that's E. I think. I think she's exactly right, right. So, um, trying trying out the different things. But then certainly paying attention to the regulatory battles and the legal battles. Um, there are a bunch of different important legal fights that are going on right now. Obviously, you know, Cory's with the F f and F f is a good, really great source. Thio pay attention to for for where and how all those different legal battles were playing out. There are other civil society groups also, that air worth following and paying attention. Um, you know, it's nice to think, you know, one of the things that I think, um, the developer community in particular often likes toe try and ignore, Um, you know, legal and regulatory battles and sort of saying, you know, we'll just kind of code around it or whatever. Um, I think that's that's dangerous. And I think part of the reason that we're in this this mess that we're in today is in part because of, you know, previous regulatory and legal regimes. Um and so I think we need to be very, very careful about, um, you know, what sorts of things come down the road. So paying attention close careful attention and not just assuming. Like okay, if it's bad for Facebook, if it's going toe regulate Facebook or Google, that must be good. Um, because in some cases it might be, but in a lot of cases is gonna be the type of thing that Facebook can handle it. And then we lock in Facebook forever. Andi, that's that's the thing that worries me the most. So I think, paying attention to those speaking up, Um, you know, I know it's very easy to be cynical and to say that you know, Congress doesn't listen toe people. That's not really true, you know, on certain issues, maybe. But in a lot of cases, and especially on issues like this, if you speak up and if you call your you know, congressman, or are senator or are whatever other representative, um, you know, they will actually pay attention. A lot of cases on DSO it is really worth doing and speaking up and making a difference that way.

[1:16:02] spk_3: A Marine

[1:16:03] spk_6: 200% behind both. Like Jay, I would add, if you're a developer, please contribute to the project as well. But what I think what is what is missing is where a lot of people are vocal that were a bit in our bubble off. People who know about this and are we're discussing about it, but again here it's mostly activist technologies working in that area. Let's try to speak out. Let's try to touch as many people as possible outside the circle. We had this debate just before when we're preparing for this thing. Thats meet up When we were talking about the social dilemma and saying Okay, did you like it guys on then we way were a bit split on between one hand. It's Yeah, it's a lot of things we know and maybe they pushed it too far by trying Thio impersonate the algorithm, etcetera. But on the other hand, there are so many people who don't know what an algorithm is. Maybe that's how far we need to go. Maybe how can we, uh, how can we simplify this? How can we make it easy for people to understand off how how they're stuck in these in these big bubbles and completely profited by this algorithm? How can we do this? Because, yes, there is a good group of people who understand them or trying to act, who are pushing for regulations, etcetera. What about 90% off the rest of the world. We need to touch this people. So let's try to find ways and be vocal towards that. These people as well

[1:17:39] spk_3: and last, but not least, Corey.

[1:17:42] spk_4: Sure. I mean, obviously, I think you should get involved with the FF, too. And I think that talking to politicians, especially in election year, is important. And this is a year where where these issues are on a lot of politicians minds, Um, I would add that as technologists, you can help by bringing a healthy dollop of skepticism to the discourse about how effective machine learning is that manipulation, right? The the best source we have for how good big tech is at getting us to do stuff is their own sales pitch to people. They're hoping to sell ads to right. That's the origin of the story, that big tech as a mind control ray. And you know the idea that, like Google and Facebook, built a mind control rate to sell your kid, fidget spinners and then Robert Mercer stolen and made your uncle racist is certainly very comforting if you want to go on loving your uncle. But

[1:18:32] spk_2: maybe it's

[1:18:32] spk_4: like the social conditions that created the paranoia. Conspiracy is, um, and so on that that that has led to that. And maybe we shouldn't believe big tech. I mean after all. You know, when they tell us they pay their taxes, they're lying. When they tell us they punish sexual predators who work in their executive ranks, they're lying. When they told us they weren't building drone stuff, they were lying. When they told us they weren't building a search engine for China, they were lying. When they told us that they weren't minding their own suppliers data to make knock off products, they were lying. Do

[1:19:03] spk_2: we think that

[1:19:03] spk_4: the only time they're telling the truth is when they filed patent applications and boast to them to their customers about how good their products are and why they should spend top dollar on ads? I think that we need to be really skeptical of their claims and of the claims that have emerged from people who I think are well intentioned critics of tech, not not merely because we should know what's true, but also because if

[1:19:27] spk_2: we

[1:19:27] spk_4: really do think they have a mind control ray, then the temptation is to demand that they use it for good right toe, not make them so small that they could no longer wield it, not least because you know the mind control Re advocates say that if you break up Google and Facebook, you end up with 1000 pip pip squeaks with mind control raise as opposed to a couple of big, easy to regulate companies.

[1:19:49] spk_2: We can either

[1:19:49] spk_4: fix the Internet or we can fix the tech companies. And, you know, I think that everyone who ever claimed to have built mind control turned out to be a liar. You know, whether it was rescued in or the CIA with M K Ultra or pick up artists. They're all kidding themselves or us or both. Right, Uh, don't give these guys credit for for being, you know, super geniuses from another dimension recognize that they are ordinary mediocrities no better or worse than you and me and assume that what they're getting away with they're getting away with because no one's checking the same bad impulses that we all have, and not because of some exceptional character of technology that demands that we drape them in golden chains and appoint them kind of the constitutional monarch of our technological future, where they consent to take some actions out of no blessedly J that benefit us all. While continuing to govern our entire electronic nervous system for the centuries to come.

[1:20:50] spk_3: Wow. Okay, with that, we have to end our meet up. Thank you. So so much to all of our amazing Panelist. That was such a great discussion. Um, I'm leaving just so pumped and inspired, and I hope you all due to this has been recorded. So if you want to show this to your friends or your networks, please share that will be proposing that on the Internet archive website. Um, and now we'll be going to gather town for those of us who want to continue the discussion. And if you want, if you wanna, you know, talk about a specific thing, you can put it in the global chat and say, Hey, I want to talk about this part of that discussion or, you know, I want to talk about this. You can put on the global chat and say, Hey, I'm gonna be on the beach or I'm gonna be in the bar downstairs in gather town. So feel free to hang out there after this. Wendy, you have any last butts?

[1:21:43] spk_2: Just that in October to build on Corey's point. We're gonna have Tim Wong with a very new book questioning the whole fallacy of the advertising model on whether it really delivers. It's called the subprime attention crisis. So I'll send you all, um, invite our next event. Have fun. You know, last month, people hung out in gathered town till 3:30 p.m. So go have lunch. Come back. It's really fun. And thank you so much for joining us. It's giving us a lot of hope and, um, things to think about so we'll see you and gather.

[1:22:21] spk_6: Thank you. Bye.

[1:22:23] spk_3: Mhm. I want to save this chat and read it later. I'm seeing so many amazing discussions that I just couldn't stay up to date on.

[1:22:58] spk_2: You know how last time my we cleaned it up a little bit and we put it in SSB and other decentralized hubs? I think we should do that again.

[1:23:06] spk_3: Let's do that.

[1:23:07] spk_2: Getting out everyone's personal phone numbers at the beginning. Oh, yeah. Please

[1:23:14] spk_4: do share the chat with me. I can't seem to say that.

[1:23:18] spk_2: We will. We will. Awesome. I'm counting on you, Andy. You know where to find me. Solid So absolutely E Corey. Thank you. Alright. Bye. Margaret. So good to see you. We'll see you soon. Hi.

[1:23:42] spk_5: I

[1:23:42] spk_2: could just say hi. Okay. Thank you. Windy? Yeah. Going together now. I e I loved all your question. This is really great. We'll see it over and gather by.

